README.md, before:

# Fork of 🧬 BEND  - **Ben**chmarking **D**NA Language Models on Biologically Meaningful Tasks

The BEND paper (ICLR 2024) is available here: 

"[BEND: BENCHMARKING DNA LANGUAGE MODELS ON BIOLOGICALLY MEANINGFUL TASKS](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12570)"

Frederikke Isa Marin, Felix Teufel, Marc Horlacher, Dennis Madsen, Dennis Pultz, Ole Winther, Wouter Boomsma

## Why this fork
Although the incredible work done by the authors of BEND, we found difficult/impossible to reproduce BEND results using the given code.
This forks wants to fix issues related to the code and add some features, such as setting a random SEED for experiment reproducibility.

## Documentation
[Documentation for the BEND code repository](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

## Data

All data is available for download [here](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=aNQa0Oz2lY)

The data can be downloaded via a script, see [section 2.5](#2-setup)

## Tutorial

### 1. Data format

The data for each task is stored as a `bed` file. This file includes the genomic coordinates for each sample, as well as its split membership and potentially a label. Together with a reference genome, the file is used to extract the DNA sequences for training. Labels that are too complex to be stored in a column in the text-based `bed` file are stored in a `hdf5` file. The two files share their index, so that sample `i` in the `bed` file matches record `i` in the `hdf5` file.


`bed` is a tab-separated format that can be read like a regular table. All our task files include a column `split`, and optionally `label`. If `label` is missing, the labels are found in the `hdf5` file of the same name.
```
chromosome	start	end     split	label
chr1	    1055037	1055849	train	1
chr3	    1070026	1070436	valid	0
```

### 2. Setup

We recommend installing BEND in a conda environment with Python 3.10.
1. Clone the BEND repository: `git clone https://github.com/baillielab/BEND`
2. Change to the BEND directory: `cd BEND`
3. Install the requirements: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
4. Install BEND in development mode: `pip install -e .`
5. Download the data: `python scripts/download_bend.py`

### 3. Computing embeddings

For training downstream models, it is practical to precompute and save the embeddings to avoid recomputing them at each epoch. As embeddings can grow large when working with genomes, we use [Webdataset](https://github.com/webdataset/webdataset) `tar.gz` files as the format.
Firstly download the desired data from the [data folder](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=aNQa0Oz2lY&current_dir=data&flags=f) and place it in BEND/ (for ease of use maintain the same folder structure). 
To precompute the embeddings for all models and tasks, run : 
```
python scripts/precompute_embeddings.py 
```
This script automatically calls the hydra config file at ```/../conf/embedding/embed.yaml```. 

By default all embeddings are generated for all tasks. To alter the tasks/model for which to compute the embeddings, please alter the ```tasks``` and/or the ```models``` list in the config file (under ```hydra.sweeper``) or override the behaviour from the commandline in the following manner: 

```
python scripts/precompute_embeddings.py model=resnetlm,awdlstm task=gene_finding,enhancer_annotation
```
Train, validation and test embeddings are saved in chunks of (default) 50,000. To parallelize embeddings generation, you can call `precompute_embeddings.py` as above multiple times, but add additional arguments of the form `chunk=[10,11,12] splits=[train,valid]` to the individual calls in order to only compute specific chunks in a given call. If these arguments are not provided, the command will default to computing all chunks and splits.

#### Embedders overview

If you need to make embeddings for other purposes than preparing downstream task data, [`bend.embedders`](bend/utils/embedders.py) contains wrapper classes around the individual models. Each embedder takes a path (or name, if available on HuggingFace) of a checkpoint as the first argument, and provides an `embed()` method that takes a list of sequences and returns a list of embeddings.   
Embedders have a default-true argument `remove_special_tokens=True` in `embed()` that removes any `[CLS]`, `[SEP]` tokens from the returned embeddings. For models that return less embedding vectors than their number of input nucleotides, [embeddings can be upsampled](#how-are-embeddings-upsampled) to the original input sequence length using the `upsample_embeddings=True` argument in `embed()`.   
Some of the embedders currently also support computing logits and cross entropy losses, see the documentation for more information.

| Embedder | Reference | Models | Info |
| --- | --- | --- | ---|
|[NucleotideTransformerEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.NucleotideTransformerEmbedder)| [Dalla-Torre et al.](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.01.11.523679v2) | [8 different models available](https://huggingface.co/InstaDeepAI) | |
|[ConvNetEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.ConvNetEmbedder)| BEND | [1 model available](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=eXAmVvbRSW&current_dir=pretrained_models&flags=f) | A baseline LM used in BEND. |
|[AWDLSTMEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.AWDLSTMEmbedder)| BEND | [1 model available](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=eXAmVvbRSW&current_dir=pretrained_models&flags=f) | A baseline LM used in BEND. |
|[HyenaDNAEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.HyenaDNAEmbedder) | [Nguyen et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15794) | [5 different models available](https://huggingface.co/LongSafari) | Experimental integration. Requires Git LFS to be installed to automatically download checkpoints. Instead of the HF checkpoint name, the argument when instantiating needs to be of the format `path/to/save/checkpoints/checkpoint_name` |
|[DNABert2Embedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.DNABert2Embedder) | [Zhou et al.](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.15006v1.pdf) | [1 model available](https://huggingface.co/zhihan1996/DNABERT-2-117M) | |


All embedders can be used as follows:
```python
from bend.utils.embedders import NucleotideTransformerEmbedder

# load the embedder with a valid checkpoint name or path
embedder = NucleotideTransformerEmbedder('InstaDeepAI/nucleotide-transformer-2.5b-multi-species')

# embed a list of sequences
embeddings = embedder.embed(['AGGATGCCGAGAGTATATGGGA', 'CCCAACCGAGAGTATATGTTAT'])
# or just call directly to embed a single sequence
embedding = embedder('AGGATGCCGAGAGTATATGGGA') 

# This requires git LFS and will automatically download the checkpoint, if not already present
from bend.utils.embedders import HyenaDNAEmbedder
embedder = HyenaDNAEmbedder('pretrained_models/hyenadna/hyenadna-tiny-1k-seqlen')
```


### 4. Evaluating models

#### Training and evaluating supervised models

It is first required that the [above step (computing the embeddings)](#2-computing-embeddings) is completed.
The embeddings should afterwards be located in `BEND/data/{task_name}/{embedder}/*tar.gz`

To run a downstream task run (from `BEND/`):
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name {task}
```
By default the task is run on all embeddings. To alter this either modify the config file or change the settings from the commandline 
E.g. to run gene finding on all embeddings the commandline is:
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name gene_finding
```
To run only on resnetlm and awdlstm embeddings:
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name gene_finding embedder=resnetlm,awdlstm
```
The full list of current task names are : 

- `gene_finding`
- `enhancer_annotation`
- `variant_effects`
- `histone_modification`
- `chromatin_accessibility`
- `cpg_methylation`

And the list of available embedders/models used for training on the tasks are : 

- `awdlstm`
- `resnetlm`
- `dnabert2`
- `nt_transformer_human_ref`
- `nt_transformer_1000g`
- `nt_transformer_ms`
- `nt_transformer_v2_500m`,
- `hyenadna-large-1m`
- `hyenadna-tiny-1k`


The `train_on_task.py` script calls a trainer class `bend.utils.task_trainer`. All configurations required to adapt these 2 scripts to train on a specific task (input data, downstream model, parameters, evaluation metric etc.) are specified in the task specific [hydra](https://hydra.cc/docs/intro/) config files stored in the [conf](../conf/) directory. This minimizes the changes required to the scripts in order to introduce a potential new task. 

The results of a run can be found at :
```
BEND/downstream_tasks/{task_name}/{embedder}/
```

If desired, the config files can be modified to change parameters, output/input directory etc.

#### Unsupervised tasks

For unsupervised prediction of variant effects, embeddings don't have to be precomputed and stored. Embeddings are generated and directly evaluated using

```bash
python3 scripts/predict_variant_effects.py {variant_file_name}.bed {output_file_name}.csv {model_type} {path_to_checkpoint} {path_to_reference_genome_fasta} --embedding_idx {position_of_embedding}
```

There are two variant effect prediction tasks available for `{variant_file_name}`: Variants with expression effect (eQTLs) in `variant_effects_expression.bed` and disease-causing variants in `variant_effects_disease.bed`.

A notebook with an example of how to run the script and evaluate the results can be found in [examples/unsupervised_variant_effects.ipynb](examples/unsupervised_variant_effects.ipynb). To run all models, you can use the script [scripts/run_variant_effects.sh](scripts/run_variant_effects.sh).

------------
## Extending BEND

### Adding a new embedder

All embedders are defined in [bend/utils/embedders.py](bend/utils/embedders.py) and inherit `BaseEmbedder`. A new embedder needs to implement `load_model`, which should set up all required attributes of the class and handle loading the model checkpoint into memory. It also needs to implement `embed`, which takes a list of sequences, and returns a list of embedding matrices formatted as numpy arrays. The `embed` method should be able to handle sequences of different lengths.

### Adding a new task
As the first step, the data for a new task needs to be formatted in the [bed-based format](#1-data-format). If necessary, a `split` and `label` column should be included. The next step is to add new config files to `../conf/supervised_tasks`. You should create a new directory named after the task, and add a config file for each embedder you want to evaluate. The config files should be named after the embedder.


-------------

## Citation Guidelines

The datasets included in BEND were collected from a variety of sources. When you use any of the datasets, please ensure to correctly cite the respective original publications describing each dataset.

### BEND
    @inproceedings{
    marin2024bend,
    title={{BEND}: Benchmarking {DNA} Language Models on Biologically Meaningful Tasks},
    author={Frederikke Isa Marin and Felix Teufel and Marc Horlacher and Dennis Madsen and Dennis Pultz and Ole Winther and Wouter Boomsma},
    booktitle={The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations},
    year={2024},
    url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=uKB4cFNQFg}
    }

### Gene finding ([GENCODE](https://www.gencodegenes.org/))

    @article{frankish_gencode_2021,
	title = {{GENCODE} 2021},
	volume = {49},
	issn = {0305-1048},
	url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1087},
	doi = {10.1093/nar/gkaa1087},
	number = {D1},
	urldate = {2022-09-26},
	journal = {Nucleic Acids Research},
	author = {Frankish, Adam and Diekhans, Mark and Jungreis, Irwin and Lagarde, Julien and Loveland, Jane E and Mudge, Jonathan M and Sisu, Cristina and Wright, James C and Armstrong, Joel and Barnes, If and Berry, Andrew and Bignell, Alexandra and Boix, Carles and Carbonell Sala, Silvia and Cunningham, Fiona and Di Domenico, Tomás and Donaldson, Sarah and Fiddes, Ian T and García Girón, Carlos and Gonzalez, Jose Manuel and Grego, Tiago and Hardy, Matthew and Hourlier, Thibaut and Howe, Kevin L and Hunt, Toby and Izuogu, Osagie G and Johnson, Rory and Martin, Fergal J and Martínez, Laura and Mohanan, Shamika and Muir, Paul and Navarro, Fabio C P and Parker, Anne and Pei, Baikang and Pozo, Fernando and Riera, Ferriol Calvet and Ruffier, Magali and Schmitt, Bianca M and Stapleton, Eloise and Suner, Marie-Marthe and Sycheva, Irina and Uszczynska-Ratajczak, Barbara and Wolf, Maxim Y and Xu, Jinuri and Yang, Yucheng T and Yates, Andrew and Zerbino, Daniel and Zhang, Yan and Choudhary, Jyoti S and Gerstein, Mark and Guigó, Roderic and Hubbard, Tim J P and Kellis, Manolis and Paten, Benedict and Tress, Michael L and Flicek, Paul},
	month = jan,
	year = {2021},
	pages = {D916--D923},
    }

### Chromatin accessibility ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
### Histone modification ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
### CpG methylation ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))

    @article{noauthor_integrated_2012,
	title = {An {Integrated} {Encyclopedia} of {DNA} {Elements} in the {Human} {Genome}},
	volume = {489},
	issn = {0028-0836},
	url = {https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3439153/},
	doi = {10.1038/nature11247},
	number = {7414},
	urldate = {2023-05-23},
	journal = {Nature},
	month = sep,
	year = {2012},
	pmid = {22955616},
	pmcid = {PMC3439153},
	pages = {57--74},
    }


### Enhancer annotation ([Fulco et al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-019-0538-0), [Gasperini et al.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S009286741831554X), [Avsec et al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01252-x) )

**Enhancers**

    @article{fulco_activity-by-contact_2019,
    title = {Activity-by-contact model of enhancer–promoter regulation from thousands of {CRISPR} perturbations},
    volume = {51},
    copyright = {2019 The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.},
    issn = {1546-1718},
    url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-019-0538-0},
    doi = {10.1038/s41588-019-0538-0},
    language = {en},
    number = {12},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Nature Genetics},
    author = {Fulco, Charles P. and Nasser, Joseph and Jones, Thouis R. and Munson, Glen and Bergman, Drew T. and Subramanian, Vidya and Grossman, Sharon R. and Anyoha, Rockwell and Doughty, Benjamin R. and Patwardhan, Tejal A. and Nguyen, Tung H. and Kane, Michael and Perez, Elizabeth M. and Durand, Neva C. and Lareau, Caleb A. and Stamenova, Elena K. and Aiden, Erez Lieberman and Lander, Eric S. and Engreitz, Jesse M.},
    month = dec,
    year = {2019},
    note = {Number: 12
    Publisher: Nature Publishing Group},
    keywords = {Epigenetics, Epigenomics, Functional genomics, Gene expression, Gene regulation},
    pages = {1664--1669},
    }

**Enhancers**

    @article{gasperini_genome-wide_2019,
    title = {A {Genome}-wide {Framework} for {Mapping} {Gene} {Regulation} via {Cellular} {Genetic} {Screens}},
    volume = {176},
    issn = {0092-8674},
    url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S009286741831554X},
    doi = {10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.029},
    language = {en},
    number = {1},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Cell},
    author = {Gasperini, Molly and Hill, Andrew J. and McFaline-Figueroa, José L. and Martin, Beth and Kim, Seungsoo and Zhang, Melissa D. and Jackson, Dana and Leith, Anh and Schreiber, Jacob and Noble, William S. and Trapnell, Cole and Ahituv, Nadav and Shendure, Jay},
    month = jan,
    year = {2019},
    keywords = {CRISPR, CRISPRi, RNA-seq, crisprQTL, eQTL, enhancer, gene regulation, genetic screen, human genetics, single cell},
    pages = {377--390.e19},
    }


**Transcription start sites**

    @article{avsec_effective_2021,
    title = {Effective gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions},
    volume = {18},
    copyright = {2021 The Author(s)},
    issn = {1548-7105},
    url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01252-x},
    doi = {10.1038/s41592-021-01252-x},
    language = {en},
    number = {10},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Nature Methods},
    author = {Avsec, Žiga and Agarwal, Vikram and Visentin, Daniel and Ledsam, Joseph R. and Grabska-Barwinska, Agnieszka and Taylor, Kyle R. and Assael, Yannis and Jumper, John and Kohli, Pushmeet and Kelley, David R.},
    month = oct,
    year = {2021},
    note = {Number: 10
    Publisher: Nature Publishing Group},
    keywords = {Gene expression, Machine learning, Software, Transcriptomics},
    pages = {1196--1203},
    }


### Noncoding Variant Effects (Expression) ([DeepSEA](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3547))
DeepSEA's data was sourced from [GRASP](https://grasp.nhlbi.nih.gov/Overview.aspx) and the [1000 Genomes Project](https://www.internationalgenome.org/), which should also be attributed accordingly.

    @article{zhou_predicting_2015,
	title = {Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning–based sequence model},
	url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3547},
	doi = {10.1038/nmeth.3547},
	language = {en},
	number = {10},
	urldate = {2023-06-07},
	journal = {Nature Methods},
	author = {Zhou, Jian and Troyanskaya, Olga G},
	year = {2015},
    }

### Noncoding variant effects (Disease) ([ClinVar](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
In case the variant consequences categories are used, [Ensembl VEP](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-016-0974-4) should be attributed.

    @article{10.1093/nar/gkz972,
    author = {Landrum, Melissa J and Chitipiralla, Shanmuga and Brown, Garth R and Chen, Chao and Gu, Baoshan and Hart, Jennifer and Hoffman, Douglas and Jang, Wonhee and Kaur, Kuljeet and Liu, Chunlei and Lyoshin, Vitaly and Maddipatla, Zenith and Maiti, Rama and Mitchell, Joseph and O’Leary, Nuala and Riley, George R and Shi, Wenyao and Zhou, George and Schneider, Valerie and Maglott, Donna and Holmes, J Bradley and Kattman, Brandi L},
    title = "{ClinVar: improvements to accessing data}",
    journal = {Nucleic Acids Research},
    volume = {48},
    number = {D1},
    pages = {D835-D844},
    year = {2019},
    month = {11},
    issn = {0305-1048},
    doi = {10.1093/nar/gkz972},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz972},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/48/D1/D835/31698033/gkz972.pdf},
    }





## FAQ

### How are embeddings upsampled?
Due to tokenization strategies, some models by default return less embedding vectors than their number of input nucleotides. As we still require nucleotide-level input for nucleotide-level prediction tasks, we implement upsampling strategies to match the number of returned embeddings to the number of input nucleotides.

Model | Upsampling strategy
--- | ---
DNABert | The overlapping k-mer tokenization strategy of DNABert causes some "missing embeddings" at the start and the end of the input sequence, as there is no context to build the k-mer tokens from. For `k=3`, we repeat the first and the last embedding vectors once. For `k=4`, we repeat the first once and the last twice. For `k=5`, we repeat the first and the last twice. For `k=6`, we repeat the first twice and the last three times. 
Nucleotide Transformer | Due to 6-mer tokenization, each embedding is repeated 6 times. Remainder tokens are single nucleotides and left as-is.
GENA-LM, DNABERT-2, GROVER | BPE tokens have variable length. We repeat each embedding vector to the length of the sequence represented by its token.

Commit message:

Implement variant effects task (#19)
* feat: reduce number of arguments to pass

* fix: allow to run on entire dataset

* feat: save data and embeddings to hdf5 file

* feat: run variant effects on awdlstm using a dataloader

* feat: add saving directory as argument

* feat: add dotenv dependency

* feat: show variant effects results

* fix: remove extra markdown cell

* refact: update .ignore

* refact: formatting

* refact: removed h5. Saving into .csv files

* feat: load embedder using hydra and embed.yml

* refact: remove batch var_eff awdlstm

* feat: add instructions on how to run variant effects

README.md, after:

# Fork of 🧬 BEND  - **Ben**chmarking **D**NA Language Models on Biologically Meaningful Tasks

The BEND paper (ICLR 2024) is available here: 

"[BEND: BENCHMARKING DNA LANGUAGE MODELS ON BIOLOGICALLY MEANINGFUL TASKS](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12570)"

Frederikke Isa Marin, Felix Teufel, Marc Horlacher, Dennis Madsen, Dennis Pultz, Ole Winther, Wouter Boomsma

## Why this fork
Although the incredible work done by the authors of BEND, we found difficult/impossible to reproduce BEND results using the given code.
This forks wants to fix issues related to the code and add some features, such as setting a random SEED for experiment reproducibility.

## Documentation
[Documentation for the BEND code repository](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

## Data

All data is available for download [here](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=aNQa0Oz2lY)

The data can be downloaded via a script, see [section 2.5](#2-setup)

## Tutorial

### 1. Data format

The data for each task is stored as a `bed` file. This file includes the genomic coordinates for each sample, as well as its split membership and potentially a label. Together with a reference genome, the file is used to extract the DNA sequences for training. Labels that are too complex to be stored in a column in the text-based `bed` file are stored in a `hdf5` file. The two files share their index, so that sample `i` in the `bed` file matches record `i` in the `hdf5` file.


`bed` is a tab-separated format that can be read like a regular table. All our task files include a column `split`, and optionally `label`. If `label` is missing, the labels are found in the `hdf5` file of the same name.
```
chromosome	start	end     split	label
chr1	    1055037	1055849	train	1
chr3	    1070026	1070436	valid	0
```

### 2. Setup

We recommend installing BEND in a conda environment with Python 3.10.
1. Clone the BEND repository: `git clone https://github.com/baillielab/BEND`
2. Change to the BEND directory: `cd BEND`
3. Install the requirements: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
4. Install BEND in development mode: `pip install -e .`
5. Download the data: `python scripts/download_bend.py`

### 3. Computing embeddings

For training downstream models, it is practical to precompute and save the embeddings to avoid recomputing them at each epoch. As embeddings can grow large when working with genomes, we use [Webdataset](https://github.com/webdataset/webdataset) `tar.gz` files as the format.
Firstly download the desired data from the [data folder](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=aNQa0Oz2lY&current_dir=data&flags=f) and place it in BEND/ (for ease of use maintain the same folder structure). 
To precompute the embeddings for all models and tasks, run : 
```
python scripts/precompute_embeddings.py 
```
This script automatically calls the hydra config file at ```/../conf/embedding/embed.yaml```. 

By default all embeddings are generated for all tasks. To alter the tasks/model for which to compute the embeddings, please alter the ```tasks``` and/or the ```models``` list in the config file (under ```hydra.sweeper``) or override the behaviour from the commandline in the following manner: 

```
python scripts/precompute_embeddings.py model=resnetlm,awdlstm task=gene_finding,enhancer_annotation
```
Train, validation and test embeddings are saved in chunks of (default) 50,000. To parallelize embeddings generation, you can call `precompute_embeddings.py` as above multiple times, but add additional arguments of the form `chunk=[10,11,12] splits=[train,valid]` to the individual calls in order to only compute specific chunks in a given call. If these arguments are not provided, the command will default to computing all chunks and splits.

#### Embedders overview

If you need to make embeddings for other purposes than preparing downstream task data, [`bend.embedders`](bend/utils/embedders.py) contains wrapper classes around the individual models. Each embedder takes a path (or name, if available on HuggingFace) of a checkpoint as the first argument, and provides an `embed()` method that takes a list of sequences and returns a list of embeddings.   
Embedders have a default-true argument `remove_special_tokens=True` in `embed()` that removes any `[CLS]`, `[SEP]` tokens from the returned embeddings. For models that return less embedding vectors than their number of input nucleotides, [embeddings can be upsampled](#how-are-embeddings-upsampled) to the original input sequence length using the `upsample_embeddings=True` argument in `embed()`.   
Some of the embedders currently also support computing logits and cross entropy losses, see the documentation for more information.

| Embedder | Reference | Models | Info |
| --- | --- | --- | ---|
|[NucleotideTransformerEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.NucleotideTransformerEmbedder)| [Dalla-Torre et al.](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.01.11.523679v2) | [8 different models available](https://huggingface.co/InstaDeepAI) | |
|[ConvNetEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.ConvNetEmbedder)| BEND | [1 model available](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=eXAmVvbRSW&current_dir=pretrained_models&flags=f) | A baseline LM used in BEND. |
|[AWDLSTMEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.AWDLSTMEmbedder)| BEND | [1 model available](https://sid.erda.dk/cgi-sid/ls.py?share_id=eXAmVvbRSW&current_dir=pretrained_models&flags=f) | A baseline LM used in BEND. |
|[HyenaDNAEmbedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.HyenaDNAEmbedder) | [Nguyen et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15794) | [5 different models available](https://huggingface.co/LongSafari) | Experimental integration. Requires Git LFS to be installed to automatically download checkpoints. Instead of the HF checkpoint name, the argument when instantiating needs to be of the format `path/to/save/checkpoints/checkpoint_name` |
|[DNABert2Embedder](https://bend.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bend.utils.embedders.html#bend.utils.embedders.DNABert2Embedder) | [Zhou et al.](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.15006v1.pdf) | [1 model available](https://huggingface.co/zhihan1996/DNABERT-2-117M) | |


All embedders can be used as follows:
```python
from bend.utils.embedders import NucleotideTransformerEmbedder

# load the embedder with a valid checkpoint name or path
embedder = NucleotideTransformerEmbedder('InstaDeepAI/nucleotide-transformer-2.5b-multi-species')

# embed a list of sequences
embeddings = embedder.embed(['AGGATGCCGAGAGTATATGGGA', 'CCCAACCGAGAGTATATGTTAT'])
# or just call directly to embed a single sequence
embedding = embedder('AGGATGCCGAGAGTATATGGGA') 

# This requires git LFS and will automatically download the checkpoint, if not already present
from bend.utils.embedders import HyenaDNAEmbedder
embedder = HyenaDNAEmbedder('pretrained_models/hyenadna/hyenadna-tiny-1k-seqlen')
```


### 4. Evaluating models

#### Training and evaluating supervised models

It is first required that the [above step (computing the embeddings)](#2-computing-embeddings) is completed.
The embeddings should afterwards be located in `BEND/data/{task_name}/{embedder}/*tar.gz`

To run a downstream task run (from `BEND/`):
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name {task}
```
By default the task is run on all embeddings. To alter this either modify the config file or change the settings from the commandline 
E.g. to run gene finding on all embeddings the commandline is:
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name gene_finding
```
To run only on resnetlm and awdlstm embeddings:
```
python scripts/train_on_task.py --config-name gene_finding embedder=resnetlm,awdlstm
```
The full list of current task names are : 

- `gene_finding`
- `enhancer_annotation`
- `variant_effects`
- `histone_modification`
- `chromatin_accessibility`
- `cpg_methylation`

And the list of available embedders/models used for training on the tasks are : 

- `awdlstm`
- `resnetlm`
- `dnabert2`
- `nt_transformer_human_ref`
- `nt_transformer_1000g`
- `nt_transformer_ms`
- `nt_transformer_v2_500m`,
- `hyenadna-large-1m`
- `hyenadna-tiny-1k`


The `train_on_task.py` script calls a trainer class `bend.utils.task_trainer`. All configurations required to adapt these 2 scripts to train on a specific task (input data, downstream model, parameters, evaluation metric etc.) are specified in the task specific [hydra](https://hydra.cc/docs/intro/) config files stored in the [conf](../conf/) directory. This minimizes the changes required to the scripts in order to introduce a potential new task. 

The results of a run can be found at :
```
BEND/downstream_tasks/{task_name}/{embedder}/
```

If desired, the config files can be modified to change parameters, output/input directory etc.

#### Unsupervised tasks

For unsupervised prediction of variant effects, embeddings don't have to be precomputed and stored. Embeddings are generated and directly evaluated using

```bash
python3 scripts/predict_variant_effects.py --work_dir {path_to_BEND_directory} --type {expression/disease} --model {embedder}
```

There are two types of variant effect prediction tasks available:
- __expression__: Variants with expression effect (eQTLs) in `variant_effects_expression.bed`
- __disease__: disease-causing variants in `variant_effects_disease.bed`.

To run all models on both variant effects expression and disease, you can use the script [scripts/run_variant_effects.sh](scripts/run_variant_effects.sh).

------------
## Extending BEND

### Adding a new embedder

All embedders are defined in [bend/utils/embedders.py](bend/utils/embedders.py) and inherit `BaseEmbedder`. A new embedder needs to implement `load_model`, which should set up all required attributes of the class and handle loading the model checkpoint into memory. It also needs to implement `embed`, which takes a list of sequences, and returns a list of embedding matrices formatted as numpy arrays. The `embed` method should be able to handle sequences of different lengths.

In addition, [conf/embedding/embed.yaml](conf/embedding/embed.yaml) needs to be updated as follows:

```
$new_embedder_name
    target: bend.utils.embedders.$new_embedder_class
    model_name: $path_to_the_pretrained_embedder_weights_and_tokeniser_config_files
    upsample_embeddings: true/false
```

### Adding a new task
As the first step, the data for a new task needs to be formatted in the [bed-based format](#1-data-format). If necessary, a `split` and `label` column should be included. The next step is to add new config files to `../conf/supervised_tasks`. You should create a new directory named after the task, and add a config file for each embedder you want to evaluate. The config files should be named after the embedder.


-------------

## Citation Guidelines

The datasets included in BEND were collected from a variety of sources. When you use any of the datasets, please ensure to correctly cite the respective original publications describing each dataset.

### BEND
    @inproceedings{
    marin2024bend,
    title={{BEND}: Benchmarking {DNA} Language Models on Biologically Meaningful Tasks},
    author={Frederikke Isa Marin and Felix Teufel and Marc Horlacher and Dennis Madsen and Dennis Pultz and Ole Winther and Wouter Boomsma},
    booktitle={The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations},
    year={2024},
    url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=uKB4cFNQFg}
    }

### Gene finding ([GENCODE](https://www.gencodegenes.org/))

    @article{frankish_gencode_2021,
	title = {{GENCODE} 2021},
	volume = {49},
	issn = {0305-1048},
	url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1087},
	doi = {10.1093/nar/gkaa1087},
	number = {D1},
	urldate = {2022-09-26},
	journal = {Nucleic Acids Research},
	author = {Frankish, Adam and Diekhans, Mark and Jungreis, Irwin and Lagarde, Julien and Loveland, Jane E and Mudge, Jonathan M and Sisu, Cristina and Wright, James C and Armstrong, Joel and Barnes, If and Berry, Andrew and Bignell, Alexandra and Boix, Carles and Carbonell Sala, Silvia and Cunningham, Fiona and Di Domenico, Tomás and Donaldson, Sarah and Fiddes, Ian T and García Girón, Carlos and Gonzalez, Jose Manuel and Grego, Tiago and Hardy, Matthew and Hourlier, Thibaut and Howe, Kevin L and Hunt, Toby and Izuogu, Osagie G and Johnson, Rory and Martin, Fergal J and Martínez, Laura and Mohanan, Shamika and Muir, Paul and Navarro, Fabio C P and Parker, Anne and Pei, Baikang and Pozo, Fernando and Riera, Ferriol Calvet and Ruffier, Magali and Schmitt, Bianca M and Stapleton, Eloise and Suner, Marie-Marthe and Sycheva, Irina and Uszczynska-Ratajczak, Barbara and Wolf, Maxim Y and Xu, Jinuri and Yang, Yucheng T and Yates, Andrew and Zerbino, Daniel and Zhang, Yan and Choudhary, Jyoti S and Gerstein, Mark and Guigó, Roderic and Hubbard, Tim J P and Kellis, Manolis and Paten, Benedict and Tress, Michael L and Flicek, Paul},
	month = jan,
	year = {2021},
	pages = {D916--D923},
    }

### Chromatin accessibility ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
### Histone modification ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
### CpG methylation ([ENCODE](https://www.encodeproject.org/))

    @article{noauthor_integrated_2012,
	title = {An {Integrated} {Encyclopedia} of {DNA} {Elements} in the {Human} {Genome}},
	volume = {489},
	issn = {0028-0836},
	url = {https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3439153/},
	doi = {10.1038/nature11247},
	number = {7414},
	urldate = {2023-05-23},
	journal = {Nature},
	month = sep,
	year = {2012},
	pmid = {22955616},
	pmcid = {PMC3439153},
	pages = {57--74},
    }


### Enhancer annotation ([Fulco et al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-019-0538-0), [Gasperini et al.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S009286741831554X), [Avsec et al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01252-x) )

**Enhancers**

    @article{fulco_activity-by-contact_2019,
    title = {Activity-by-contact model of enhancer–promoter regulation from thousands of {CRISPR} perturbations},
    volume = {51},
    copyright = {2019 The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.},
    issn = {1546-1718},
    url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-019-0538-0},
    doi = {10.1038/s41588-019-0538-0},
    language = {en},
    number = {12},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Nature Genetics},
    author = {Fulco, Charles P. and Nasser, Joseph and Jones, Thouis R. and Munson, Glen and Bergman, Drew T. and Subramanian, Vidya and Grossman, Sharon R. and Anyoha, Rockwell and Doughty, Benjamin R. and Patwardhan, Tejal A. and Nguyen, Tung H. and Kane, Michael and Perez, Elizabeth M. and Durand, Neva C. and Lareau, Caleb A. and Stamenova, Elena K. and Aiden, Erez Lieberman and Lander, Eric S. and Engreitz, Jesse M.},
    month = dec,
    year = {2019},
    note = {Number: 12
    Publisher: Nature Publishing Group},
    keywords = {Epigenetics, Epigenomics, Functional genomics, Gene expression, Gene regulation},
    pages = {1664--1669},
    }

**Enhancers**

    @article{gasperini_genome-wide_2019,
    title = {A {Genome}-wide {Framework} for {Mapping} {Gene} {Regulation} via {Cellular} {Genetic} {Screens}},
    volume = {176},
    issn = {0092-8674},
    url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S009286741831554X},
    doi = {10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.029},
    language = {en},
    number = {1},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Cell},
    author = {Gasperini, Molly and Hill, Andrew J. and McFaline-Figueroa, José L. and Martin, Beth and Kim, Seungsoo and Zhang, Melissa D. and Jackson, Dana and Leith, Anh and Schreiber, Jacob and Noble, William S. and Trapnell, Cole and Ahituv, Nadav and Shendure, Jay},
    month = jan,
    year = {2019},
    keywords = {CRISPR, CRISPRi, RNA-seq, crisprQTL, eQTL, enhancer, gene regulation, genetic screen, human genetics, single cell},
    pages = {377--390.e19},
    }


**Transcription start sites**

    @article{avsec_effective_2021,
    title = {Effective gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions},
    volume = {18},
    copyright = {2021 The Author(s)},
    issn = {1548-7105},
    url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01252-x},
    doi = {10.1038/s41592-021-01252-x},
    language = {en},
    number = {10},
    urldate = {2023-05-23},
    journal = {Nature Methods},
    author = {Avsec, Žiga and Agarwal, Vikram and Visentin, Daniel and Ledsam, Joseph R. and Grabska-Barwinska, Agnieszka and Taylor, Kyle R. and Assael, Yannis and Jumper, John and Kohli, Pushmeet and Kelley, David R.},
    month = oct,
    year = {2021},
    note = {Number: 10
    Publisher: Nature Publishing Group},
    keywords = {Gene expression, Machine learning, Software, Transcriptomics},
    pages = {1196--1203},
    }


### Noncoding Variant Effects (Expression) ([DeepSEA](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3547))
DeepSEA's data was sourced from [GRASP](https://grasp.nhlbi.nih.gov/Overview.aspx) and the [1000 Genomes Project](https://www.internationalgenome.org/), which should also be attributed accordingly.

    @article{zhou_predicting_2015,
	title = {Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning–based sequence model},
	url = {https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3547},
	doi = {10.1038/nmeth.3547},
	language = {en},
	number = {10},
	urldate = {2023-06-07},
	journal = {Nature Methods},
	author = {Zhou, Jian and Troyanskaya, Olga G},
	year = {2015},
    }

### Noncoding variant effects (Disease) ([ClinVar](https://www.encodeproject.org/))
In case the variant consequences categories are used, [Ensembl VEP](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-016-0974-4) should be attributed.

    @article{10.1093/nar/gkz972,
    author = {Landrum, Melissa J and Chitipiralla, Shanmuga and Brown, Garth R and Chen, Chao and Gu, Baoshan and Hart, Jennifer and Hoffman, Douglas and Jang, Wonhee and Kaur, Kuljeet and Liu, Chunlei and Lyoshin, Vitaly and Maddipatla, Zenith and Maiti, Rama and Mitchell, Joseph and O’Leary, Nuala and Riley, George R and Shi, Wenyao and Zhou, George and Schneider, Valerie and Maglott, Donna and Holmes, J Bradley and Kattman, Brandi L},
    title = "{ClinVar: improvements to accessing data}",
    journal = {Nucleic Acids Research},
    volume = {48},
    number = {D1},
    pages = {D835-D844},
    year = {2019},
    month = {11},
    issn = {0305-1048},
    doi = {10.1093/nar/gkz972},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz972},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/48/D1/D835/31698033/gkz972.pdf},
    }





## FAQ

### How are embeddings upsampled?
Due to tokenization strategies, some models by default return less embedding vectors than their number of input nucleotides. As we still require nucleotide-level input for nucleotide-level prediction tasks, we implement upsampling strategies to match the number of returned embeddings to the number of input nucleotides.

Model | Upsampling strategy
--- | ---
DNABert | The overlapping k-mer tokenization strategy of DNABert causes some "missing embeddings" at the start and the end of the input sequence, as there is no context to build the k-mer tokens from. For `k=3`, we repeat the first and the last embedding vectors once. For `k=4`, we repeat the first once and the last twice. For `k=5`, we repeat the first and the last twice. For `k=6`, we repeat the first twice and the last three times. 
Nucleotide Transformer | Due to 6-mer tokenization, each embedding is repeated 6 times. Remainder tokens are single nucleotides and left as-is.
GENA-LM, DNABERT-2, GROVER | BPE tokens have variable length. We repeat each embedding vector to the length of the sequence represented by its token.
